Licensing content and structure updates (#5520)
influxdata/docs-v2: content/influxdb/clustered/admin/licensing.md

  the InfluxDB Clustered software.
menu:
  influxdb_clustered:
    parent: Administer InfluxDB Clustered
    name: Manage your license
weight: 101
influxdb/clustered/tags: [licensing]
related:
  - /influxdb/clustered/install/licensing/
  - /influxdb/clustered/admin/upgrade/
---

Install and manage your InfluxDB Clustered license to authorize the use of
the InfluxDB Clustered software.

- [Install your InfluxDB license](#install-your-influxdb-license)
- [Recover from a license misconfiguration](#recover-from-a-license-misconfiguration)
- [Renew your license](#renew-your-license)
- [License enforcement](#license-enforcement)
  - [A valid license is required](#a-valid-license-is-required)
  - [Periodic license checks](#periodic-license-checks)
  - [License grace periods](#license-grace-periods)
    - [License expiry logs](#license-expiry-logs)
    - [Query brownout](#query-brownout)

{{% note %}}
#### License enforcement is currently an opt-in feature

In currently available versions of InfluxDB Clustered, license enforcement is an
opt-in feature that allows InfluxData to introduce license enforcement to
customers, and allows customers to deactivate the feature if issues arise.

> In the future, all releases of InfluxDB Clustered will require an active license
> to use the product.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the future, all releases of InfluxDB Clustered will require customers to configure an active license
before they can use the product.
```

To opt into license enforcement, include the `useLicensedBinaries` feature flag
in your `AppInstance` resource _([See the example below](#enable-feature-flag))_.
To deactivate license enforcement, remove the `useLicensedBinaries` feature flag.
{{% /note %}}

## Install your InfluxDB license

{{% note %}}
If setting up an InfluxDB Clustered deployment for the first time, first
[set up the prerequisites](/influxdb/clustered/install/licensing/) and

> [configure your cluster](/influxdb/clustered/install/configure-cluster/).
> You will be able to install your license after the `influxdb` namespace is
> created and prepared.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[configure your cluster](/influxdb/clustered/install/configure-cluster/).
The configuration process creates a default `influxdb` namespace in your cluster.
After the `influxdb` namespace is
created and prepared, you will be able to install your license.
```

Reviewer: Sorry if this has been discussed, but what if they use a different namespace name (see https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/clustered/install/configure-cluster/#create-a-namespace-for-influxdb)? Does it still work?

Author: They can use whatever namespace name they want. I'm going to make this generic. The install docs use `influxdb` as the namespace name.

    property--for example:

    ```yml
    apiVersion: kubecfg.dev/v1alpha1
    kind: AppInstance
    # ...
    spec:
      package:
        spec:
          featureFlags:
            - useLicensedBinaries
    ```

InfluxDB Clustered detects the `License` resource and extracts the credentials
into a secret required by InfluxDB Clustered Kubernetes pods.
Pods validate the license secret both at startup and periodically (roughly once
per hour) while running.

## Recover from a license misconfiguration

If you deploy a licensed release of InfluxDB Clustered without an invalid or
expired license, many of the pods in your cluster will crash on startup and will
likely enter a `CrashLoopBackoff` state without ever running or becoming healthy.
Because the license is stored in a volume-mounted Kubernetes secret, invalid
licenses affect both old and new pods.

Once a valid `License` resource is applied, new pods will begin to start up normally.
Licenses are validated when the `License` resource is applied. If the license
is invalid when you attempt to apply it, the InfluxDB clustered license
controller will not add or update the required secret.

## Renew your license

> Your InfluxData sales representative will proactively reach out to you regarding
> license renewals in advance of your license expiration. You are also welcome to
> contact your sales representative at any time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In advance of your license expiration, your InfluxData sales representative will contact you regarding
license renewal.
You may also contact your sales representative at any time.
```

  Install and manage your InfluxDB Clustered license to authorize the use of
  the InfluxDB Clustered software.
menu:
  influxdb_clustered:
    parent: Administer InfluxDB Clustered
    name: Manage your license
weight: 101
influxdb/clustered/tags: [licensing]
related:
  - /influxdb/clustered/install/licensing/
  - /influxdb/clustered/admin/upgrade/
---

Install and manage your InfluxDB Clustered license to authorize the use of
the InfluxDB Clustered software.

- [Install your InfluxDB license](#install-your-influxdb-license)
- [Recover from a license misconfiguration](#recover-from-a-license-misconfiguration)
- [Renew your license](#renew-your-license)
- [License enforcement](#license-enforcement)
  - [A valid license is required](#a-valid-license-is-required)
  - [Periodic license checks](#periodic-license-checks)
  - [License grace periods](#license-grace-periods)
    - [License expiry logs](#license-expiry-logs)
    - [Query brownout](#query-brownout)

{{% note %}}
#### License enforcement is currently an opt-in feature

In currently available versions of InfluxDB Clustered, license enforcement is an
opt-in feature. This allows InfluxData to introduce license enforcement to a

> limited number of customers in a way that can easily be disabled if issues arise.

Reviewer 2: > Who can (or is allowed to) deactivate it, the user or InfluxData?

The user can enable the feature flag by adding it to the list of feature flags as described in this document we are commenting on.

> Can the customer opt out after opting in?

Yes, all they have to do is remove the feature flag and re-apply the AppInstance yaml.

> opt-in feature. This allows InfluxData to introduce license enforcement to a
> limited number of customers in a way that can easily be disabled if issues arise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
opt-in feature that allows InfluxData to introduce license enforcement to customers, and allows customers to deactivate the feature if issues arise.
```

In the future, all releases of InfluxDB Clustered will require an active license
to use the product.

> To opt into license enforcement, enable the `useLicensedBinaries` feature flag

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To opt into license enforcement, include the `useLicensedBinaries` feature flag
```

in your `AppInstance` resource _([See the example below](#enable-feature-flag))_.

{{% /note %}}

## Install your InfluxDB license

{{% note %}}
If setting up an InfluxDB Clustered deployment for the first time, first
[set up the prerequisites](/influxdb/clustered/install/licensing/) and
[configure your cluster](/influxdb/clustered/install/configure-cluster/).
You will be able to install your license after the `influxdb` namespace is
created and prepared.
{{% /note %}}

1.  If you haven't already,
    [request an InfluxDB Clustered license](https://influxdata.com/contact-sales).
2.  InfluxData provides you with a `license.yml` file that encapsulates your
    license token as a custom Kubernetes resource.
3.  Use `kubectl` to apply and create the `License` resource in your InfluxDB
    namespace:

    ```sh
    kubectl apply --filename license.yml --namespace influxdb
    ```

4.  <span id="enable-feature-flag"></span>

>     Update your `AppInstance` resource to enable the `useLicensedBinaries` feature flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Update your `AppInstance` resource to include the `useLicensedBinaries` feature flag.
```

    Add the `useLicensedBinaries` entry to the `.spec.package.spec.featureFlags`
    property--for example:

    ```yml
    apiVersion: kubecfg.dev/v1alpha1
    kind: AppInstance
    # ...
    spec:
      package:
        spec:
          featureFlags:
            - useLicensedBinaries
    ```

InfluxDB Clustered detects the `License` resource and extracts the credentials
into a secret required by InfluxDB Clustered Kubernetes pods.
Pods validate the license secret both at startup and periodically (roughly once
per hour) while running.

> ## Recover from an unlicensed release

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Recover from a license misconfiguration
```

It's a small thing, but the recovery would be from a bad configuration, not from a licensed or unlicensed release. I included it to hopefully allay any fears that license enforcement could lead to service disruptions.

> If you deploy a licensed release of InfluxDB Clustered without a valid license,

Reviewer 2: This paragraph isn't quite right. It's correct in describing the behavior of the new pods (ie they will crashloop) but it also implies that the existing pods will be fine. However, if the cluster doesn't have a valid, properly-installed license then even the existing pods will enter a `CrashLoopBackoff` state.

Reviewer 2: > Is the license not included in the state(?) used to deploy the old pods? 

Licenses are accessed by a volume-mounted kubernetes `Secret`. All pods in the cluster share the same Secret. This k8s `Secret` is created/updated by the `license-controller` pod whenever the customer installs the `License` resource.

>If an invalid License resource is deployed, it will affect both old and new pods?

That's right! Worth noting that if the cluster initially tries deploying an invalid license the abovementioned `license-controller` pod will fail to verify it and decline to create the necessary `Secret`. The only way a license that is installed in the cluster should ever become invalid is for it to expire after initially being installed in a valid state.

> How does the customer recover from this? Just trigger a new deploy with a valid License resource?

Yes, deploying a new valid license is the answer to a bad one (eg it expired while installed in the cluster) causing a crash loop backoff.

>Is downtime inevitable if they deploy an invalid license?

I mentioned this in an earlier response, but it should be impossible for an invalid license to override an existing valid license. This is because the `license-controller` will detect the invalidity and refuse to overwrite the `Secret` mounted into the `IOx` pods.

> If so, is there a way to validate a license before deploying it?

Yeah. I know I'm repeating myself, but I want to make sure there isn't room for ambiguity. When the customer runs `kubectl apply -f license.yml`, the `License` CustomResource may be overwritten (we can't prevent that short of a solution like a validating k8s webhook, which I would prefer to avoid but isn't totally out of the question); however, the `license-controller` that watches for the `License` CustomResource will attempt to validate the license signature before creating/updating the `Secret` mounted into IOx pods. This validation prevents a bad license from overwriting a good one and causing the IOx pods to go down.

Author: Thank you! I make sure this is clear in this section.

many of the pods in your cluster will crash on startup and will likely enter a
`CrashLoopBackoff` state without ever running or becoming healthy.

> If this happens during an upgrade, the Kubernetes control plane should detect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this happens during an upgrade, the Kubernetes control plane detects
```

> the crash loop of the new pods and prevent the termination of existing pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the crash loop of the new pods and prevents the termination of existing pods.
```

> The previous version should continue running without experiencing any service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous version will continue to run without service
```

> disruption while you work to provide a valid license.

Reviewer: What does "should" mean here?

> Once a valid `License` resource is applied, new pods should begin to start up normally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a valid `License` resource is applied, new pods will begin to start up normally.
```

This is an error recovery feature of Kubernetes that depends on a correctly
functioning Kubernetes cluster with enough capacity to perform rolling upgrades.

## Renew your license

Your InfluxData sales representative will proactively reach out to you regarding
license renewals in advance of your license expiration. You are also welcome to
contact your sales representative at any time.

---

## License enforcement

InfluxDB Clustered authorizes use of InfluxDB software through licenses issued

> by InfluxData. The following provides information about InfluxDB Clustered

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by InfluxData. The following sections provide information about InfluxDB Clustered
```

license enforcement.

### A valid license is required

> _When the `useLicensedBinaries` feature flag is enabled_,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_When you include the `useLicensedBinaries` feature flag_,
```

- Pods may become stuck in a `ContainerCreating` state if the cluster has
  never had a valid `License` resource installed.
- If an expired or invalid license is installed in the cluster, pods will become
  stuck in a `CrashLoopBackoff` state.
  Pod containers will attempt to start, detect the invalid license condition,
  print an error message, and then exit with a non-zero exit code.

### Periodic license checks

During normal operation, pods in your InfluxDB cluster check for a valid license
once per hour. You may see messages in your pod logs related to this behavior.

### License grace periods

When InfluxData issues a license, it is configured with two expiry dates.
The first is the expiry date of the contractual license. The second is a hard
expiry of the license credentials, after which pods in your cluster will begin
crash-looping until a new, valid license is installed in the cluster.

The period of time between the contractual license expiry and the hard license
expiry is considered the _grace period_. The standard grace period is 90 days,
but this may be negotiated as needed with your InfluxData sales representative.

#### License expiry logs

> The table below outlines license expiry logging behavior. It shows when the log

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table outlines license expiry logging behavior to show when the log
```

> messages begin, the level (warn vs error), and the periodicity at which they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
messages begin, the level (`Warn` or `Error`), and the periodicity at which they
```

repeat.

| Starts at             | Log level | Log periodicity |
| :-------------------- | :-------- | :-------------- |
| 1 month before expiry | Warn      | 1 msg per hour  |
| 1 week before expiry  | Warn      | 1 msg per 5 min |
| At expiry             | Error     | 1 msg per 5 min |

#### Query brownout

Starting one month after your contractual license expiry, the InfluxDB
[Querier](/influxdb/clustered/reference/internals/storage-engine/#querier)

> begins "browning out" requests. Brownouts consist of returning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
begins "browning out" requests. Brownouts return
```

`FailedPrecondition` response codes to queries for a portion of every hour.

| Starts at            | Brownout coverage  |
| :------------------- | :----------------- |
| 7 days after expiry  | 5 minutes per hour |
| 1 month after expiry | 100% of queries    |

**Brownouts only occur after the license has contractually expired**.

> Also, they **only impact query operations**. No other operations (writes,
> compaction, garbage collection, etc) are affected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, they **only impact query operations**--no other operations (writes,
compaction, garbage collection, etc) are affected.
```
